---
layout: post
title:  "Running Shoes: Reviews, Rotation, and Costs"
date:   2021-04-24 07:00:29 -0500
author: Jeff Gross
categories: newsletters
---

I like running shoes. I might like running shoes too much. We often discuss running as affordable and accessible. Compared to many sports and exercise activities, it is. Yet, many of us are out there with $300-plus GPS watches, multiple pairs of $65 shorts or tights, $15 socks, and a rotation of running shoes. I estimate that right now, in rotation, I have about $1500 worth of running shoes. I track mileage on them, and I generally know how many miles I will get out of a pair. I also buy each pair with a specific purpose in mind. Still, this is a significant expense for which runners need to plan.

Understanding what sort of running shoes you need for which runs is important, and many beginning runners will spend too much on the wrong shoes. The YouTube (or ShoeTube) sort of reviews can also get a lot of people to buy the wrong shoes, yet, if people know where to look, they can also find a lot of good recommendations. Sometimes I look through the comments under a YouTube review of a $250 carbon-plated racer, and I’ll see someone say something along the lines of, “I’m a new runner. Would this be a good shoe for me?” It makes me want to scream.

First, if you can, I recommend getting fitted and trying on a number of shoes at a local specialty running store. Most runners need neutral shoes (even if you’re a light supinator), but you could need stability shoes, especially if you have moderate or severe pronation. But the way to understand the feel of different heel-to-toe drops or even the purposes of different sorts of running shoes is to try them on and to talk to someone who knows. Many people reading this newsletter are likely experienced runners, but even we have to remember that when giving advice to a novice runner the number of miles someone runs in a week, their goals, the surfaces on which they run, and more should shape the advice we offer when asked about running shoes. What we like doesn’t necessarily mean it’s what they need.

### ShoeTube

A number of YouTubers have found the audience and figured out the algorithm (and, in some cases, drawn on other forms of support such as Patreon or subscriptions) to make a living through running and running shoe content. Ethan Newberry, [The Ginger Runner](https://www.youtube.com/c/TheGingerRunner), understands running shoes and provides accurate and objective information, and his shoe reviews are probably good for a lot of runners, road and trail, who consider themselves novice or mid-pack runners. His *Buy, Try, or Why* classification system considers design, comfort, durability, and cost. Although his content is loud and, I think, unnecessarily drawn out to get an additional advertisement break (more revenue), [Seth James Demoor](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCeSHo5kTvzoik4STh7MuMCA) offers detailed reviews that consider weight, shoe construction, purpose/use, durability, and cost in objective reviews. He has a scoring system that creates a strong comparison between different brands and shoes. Demoor is a fast amateur runner who spends a lot of time chronicling his life and training, and his durability estimate ranges for shoes usually start beyond the high end of what I get out of a pair of shoes. On opposite ends of the production value spectrum, [Believe in the Run](https://www.believeintherun.com/) and [The FOD Runner](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCcPagJur6wcbV5kej6mwG_A) also provide useful information. A number of ShoeTubers seem in over their heads and use the wrong shoes for the wrong reasons. I avoid Kofuzi, Run Like Heller, and others because their love for shoes might be persuading people to use the wrong shoes for their needs or types of runs. Passion doesn’t equal knowledge. Finally sponsored runners discussing their shoes aren’t a great source for unbiased information, even if you like their channels. When their contract ends or they sign elsewhere, their favorite shoes will change, too.

### Rotating Shoes

You might wonder why I have so many shoes in rotation. First, let me break down my rotation by shoe type currently in rotation: I have road training shoes, trail shoes, and racing shoes (albeit no races).

For the roads, I have shoes for specific purposes: easy days/recovery days, long runs, up-tempo days, and speed days. Some shoes fit in 2 or 3 categories. If you run only 3 days per week and rarely on consecutive days, you might just need one pair of running shoes, a daily trainer. On easy/recovery days, I want to save my legs. The Hoka One One Clifton 7 (MSRP $130) is my go-to for these runs. It is cushioned but not too heavy, which is why I choose it over something like the Hoka Bondi line. I want cushioning without the extra weight. I have a pair of the Clifton 6 in rotation, too. Some shoes can serve multiple purposes, including the Clifton 7, which I will wear for some of my long runs. The Hoka One One Mach 4 ($130 and my favorite 2021 shoe to date) also fits in the long run and daily run categories, too. When I want to run faster for a Fartlek, tempo, or speed workout, I like lighter shoes. The Mach 4 works for some of these runs, but the Hoka Rincon ($115) and Atreyu trainer ($55 subscription/$75 single purchase) are my go-to shoes here. They’re less durable, but they’re light, responsive, and I associate them with running a little faster. I’ll talk about cost in a moment, but if I could afford only two pairs of road shoes from this category and were a more recreational runner, I would go with the Hoka Clifton 7 and the Mach 4, as they’re durable, comfortable, and useful in different ways. By not running in the same pair of shoes on consecutive days, I let the foam decompress, which seems to extend its life.

On the trails, distance, surface, and technicality are all factors. For people in some areas--the US West Coast, for instance--you have some buttery smooth trails where your daily road trainers could do the trick. With a lot of rocks, roots, and uneven terrain, you might want something more technical. The Hoka EVO Speedgoat ($160) is my most expensive trail shoe, but it is comfortable for long distances, has the Vibram outsole for good grip in wet and muddy conditions, and has a hard rubber sole for stepping on roots and rocks. But that durability comes with more weight and less comfort. The Hoka Torrent 2 ($120) is my favorite trail shoe in the last year. It is light but has a good outsole for a range of conditions--mud, wet ground, grass, sandy trail, etc. The other trail shoe I have, the Hoka ATR Challenger 5 ($130) is an all-terrain shoe. It’s heavy but durable and works for those runs that cover mostly trail but with some hard surface. It’s a workhorse, the Clifton of the trails.

I will wait and discuss racing shoes and the era of the super shoe in a later newsletter, but my advice to most runners is don’t buy carbon-plated shoes for training. And don’t buy carbon-plated trail shoes. Train in your carbon-plated marathon shoes enough to have a feel for them, but they don’t make for good everyday shoes, despite what you might see on YouTube. They’re responsive but not as comfortable. Save your shoes and your legs.

In terms of brand, find what works for you. As you can see above, my rotation right now is mostly Hoka shoes. Over the past 5 years, I have had Brooks, Nike, Altra, and New Balance shoes as well. I never thought I would wear Hoka shoes when I first saw them. Then I tried on a pair. Find what fits your foot type.

### Cost and Value

Running shoes are expensive. Cheaper shoes aren’t necessarily a better value, and price doesn’t necessarily equate to better durability or performance. And body weight, cadence, footstrike, and other factors will vary how many miles you get out of any pair of shoes and what shoes work best for you. Track your mileage in shoes in Strava or wherever you track miles and start to see what you get out of each pair. See if your local running store offers a discount or loyalty program. Sometimes training groups or running club memberships offer discounts. Watch for the next iteration of your favorite shoe to come out and buy the current one on markdown. For instance, around the time the Hoka Clifton 8 debuts on June 1, the Clifton 7 will likely be available for around $100. I will get a pair or two then.

My way of thinking about value here is for training shoes and road shoes. Trail shoes are more durable due to additional rubber/less exposed foam, but I have also torn uppers on rocks, roots, etc. and had to retire pairs before their time.

For road shoes, I find it useful to look at cost per mile (only because it’s easier to track by mile than time on feet, even if time duration is a better way to track training than mileage). Although I like the Hoka Rincon, I find I get 225-250 miles out of each pair before the foam feels dead or the uppers rip. At a MSRP of $115, that means I am getting 1.95-2.17 miles/dollar on those shoes. In the Clifton 7, which costs $15 more, I can expect 300-350 miles out of a pair, so that means 2.30-2.70 miles/dollar. I consider this a better value than the cheaper shoe. The Hoka Mach 4 and Atreyu runners have no rubber on the outsoles, only rubberized foam, which will be less durable. I will update you when I reach higher mileage in them. As of this writing, I only have 53.4 miles in the Mach 4 and 48 miles in the Atreyu shoes. Atreyu estimates their subscription shoes will get 150 miles, and the subscription costs $55 per pair. I haven’t gotten a pair that high yet, but 150 miles would be 2.72 miles/dollar.

In addition to price, we need to consider the environmental cost. Most cities have opportunities to donate shoes to people in need, and a running shoe retired but still in good shape might have a second use for someone experiencing homelessness. Look for opportunities to donate. But the apparel industry is a significant contributor to climate change. More shoe companies are using recycled and sustainable materials, but we should keep environmental factors in mind, too. Episode 5 of Tina Muir and Knox Robinson’s [Running Realized](https://runningforreal.com/running-realized-episode-five/) podcast examines the environmental impact of the running shoe industry. It is worth a listen. Labor conditions for those making the shoes should also be considered.

### Questions for You

- Where do you find information about/reviews of running shoes?
- What is your go-to daily trainer? Why?
- How many miles can you get out of a pair of shoes?

Email me back and let me know what you think, and I will include reader feedback or answer questions in later newsletters. You can also let me know if you want to know more about running shoes and how to use specific shoes or if you want a return to more narrative and personal content.

### How do I subscribe?

If you want to receive our newsletters, just enter your [e mail address on this form](https://forms.gle/NHEsBP1wo11yYrZj7){:target="_blank"}. You will get copies of the newsletter sent to your email. That's it.

### See this newsletter online

Newsletter 8: [“Running Shoes: Reviews, Rotation, and Costs”]()
