---
layout: post
title:  "Like a Phoenix Rising from the Ashes"
date:   2021-12-05 01:00:29 -0500
author: Andrew Battista
categories: newsletters
---

Greetings running friends. It's been a bit of a delay since the previous post, and a lot has happened in the intervening months. Sorry for the radio silence! If you're reading this, no you haven't been unsubscribed from the newsletter; rather we've just taken a hiatus but hope to get back to more frequent newsletters soon. Today I write a brief update from Memphis, TN, where I finished my third St. Jude Marathon yesterday. More importantly, I am reunited with PhDistance co-author Jeff and the rest of the Western Tennessee Hoka Sub-elite running crew. During the post race celebration yesterday, we had a great time reminiscing on my epic 2014 Ragnar Road Relay segment up Suck Creek Road, which is outside of Chattanooga. The run featured about 1300 feet of elevation gain over a 4 mile stretch, and it felt great to see my teammates wave at me as they drove past on the van. These are running memories that last a lifetime.

### St. Jude Marathon Weekend Update

The St. Jude Marathon was an amazing event this year, and while I have spoken highly of virtual racing events in the past, it was so nice to be back out on the streets in Memphis again. By no means did I set a personal record, but I did run at a pace and level of effort that I was actually trained for at this juncture and mostly felt great during the race. A huge shout out to all of the St. Jude staff and friends for incredible generosity and hospitality during the weekend. I promise to come back to this event, as well as the NYC Marathon from last month, in future posts.  

### PhDistance is on Instagram and Strava

If you like reading what we've come up with so far in the newsletter, you might also want to connect with PhDistance on two of the leading social media platforms out there today: Instagram and Strava. That's right! We've created an Instagram feed at [phdistancerunning](https://www.instagram.com/phdistancerunning/) and a [Strava club](https://www.strava.com/clubs/PhDistance).

### How do I subscribe?

If you want to receive our newsletters or rifle through the long lost archives of previous posts, just enter your [e mail address on this form](https://forms.gle/NHEsBP1wo11yYrZj7){:target="_blank"}. You will get copies of the newsletter sent to your email. That's it.

### See this newsletter online

Newsletter 15: [“Like a Phoenix Rising from the Ashes”]()
