---
layout: post
title:  "This is a Thing"
date:   2021-03-02 18:56:29 -0500
categories: newsletters
---
How has the last year changed your relationship with running? Heading into 2020, I was excited to run my first 50K in March and to start competing in the masters division in road races after my 40th birthday in May. As is the case for many of us, I haven’t toed a starting line in over 14 months. Yet, during this time of physical distancing, running has provided both a sense of normalcy and escape, and I have embraced running as adventure during the pandemic. It has been an opportunity to reassess my relationship with myself, my body, and sport.

Last summer, while driving across the country, I had the opportunity to treat running as adventure seeking--something not easy after 12+ hour days in the car. I ran at 8500 feet altitude in Mammoth Lakes, California, and with bison at Antelope Island State Park in Utah. My approach continued since, seeking out more trail runs at home, including spontaneous trips to places such as Pinnacle Mountain in Arkansas. On a dusk run at Shelby Farms trails in Memphis in late July, as I quietly ran up the path alone, I even had a bobcat come out of the brush about 20 yards in front of me, not realize I was there for a while and just walk in front of me, until it finally noticed me and disappeared as quickly as it appeared back into the brush. That’s certainly a different kind of running highlight than an age group top 3, but it’s more memorable. I have been able to run a lot without training too hard to maintain a base, but I haven’t felt the urge to race, even as races have started again with safety protocols in place. I have stuck to an 80/20 ratio, with 80% of my runs in an easy range and 20% in a moderate to hard. So far in 2021, I have picked up almost as much vertical gain as I had in all of 2020.

Going forward, I have some new goals. I still think some of my best road racing times are ahead of me, especially in the half marathon and marathon. For the latter, I have good training blocks and terrible race experiences. It’s likely that I will be racing again at some point in 2021, probably both on trails and roads. But I have decided I want to focus on trail ultra races for a while, both for a different experience and because they seem to be safer during a pandemic due to their smaller scale. Ideally, the 50K for which I registered last year will happen at some point this year (it has been postponed 3 times), and then I would like to run a 50-miler or 100K in the next year (maybe I can convince Andrew to run a 100K too). The physiological adaptations--especially improved mitochondrial density from the longer runs--should help when I shift focus back to a road marathon. More importantly, I hope to continue to experience the joy that has come from taking my foot off the gas a little on training, putting less pressure on races, and seeking adventure more frequently. At such a tragic time when 515,000 and counting have died from a deadly pandemic, I know I am lucky to be healthy and able to enjoy the physical and mental benefits of running, all while doing it safely in terms of physical distancing.

Gear Insights: For well over a year, I have run nearly all my miles on Hoka One One shoes. I will talk more on my favorite shoes and shoe rotation in a future newsletter, but this week I am looking forward to getting out in the Hoka One One Mach 4 later this week. The design seems to be a significant revamp of a previously somewhat uninspiring line. The Mach 4 should fit somewhere between the Rincon and Clifton 7 in my rotation. Also, for the first time in a long time, I have run in something other than a Hoka, the Atreyu Running Company base model. I am interested in their subscription model and pricing, and the shoe is comfortable, lightweight, and responsive. If a shoe can be purchased at $55 in their subscription model and get over 150 miles, it might have a better miles per dollar ratio than a lot of other shoes, and that could be a metric for how we consider the value of training shoes. Once I hit 50 miles in both the Atreyu and the Mach 4, I will comment on them more in later posts.

Inspiration of the Week: This one goes back a few weeks, but Alexi Pappas on the Rich Roll Podcast was a good listen (or watch). Give it the time if you haven’t already. In addition to being an Atreyu-sponsored runner, Pappas is an English major, writer (Bravey: Chasing Dreams, Befriending Pain, and Other Big Ideas is on my to-read list), filmmaker, actor, and Olympic Runner. Her openness about her mother’s death by suicide, her own depression, training, and creativity is wonderful and helpful for my own thinking about the links between my running and intellectual work. This episode was a good follow-up to the Caroline Burckle episode.
- **Narratives about training for races:** Regular check-ins about our approaches to and experiences with training for races (and then actually running them)
- **Thoughts on different kinds of running:** Metacognition: taking a look at how we run and why we run the way we do. One of the big pandemic epiphanies I've had is that it's too easy for me to fall into a routine of directionless running. Variation can help.
- **Roundups:** Lists of links, videos, and ideas that we see elsewhere online.
- **Impartial gear reviews:** We aren't sponsored, and I don't intend to get into the business of "partnering" with whatever brand or product comes along, but I also can't deny that gear, accessories, and devices are a part of our experience and are worth talking about.
- **Strategies on doing analysis with fitness tracking data:** This one might be more specific to me. I am a GIS librarian and work with data and data management a lot. I think visualizing and maintaining fitness data can be fun, and informative, so I might use some space in the newsletter to talk about analysis and management with open source software and libraries.

### How do I subscribe?

If you want to receive our newsletters, just enter your [e mail address on this form](https://forms.gle/NHEsBP1wo11yYrZj7){:target="_blank"}. You will get copies of the newsletter sent to your email. That's it.

### See this newsletter online

Newsletter 1: ["Welcome to PhDistance"]()
